NMS-13971: Basic upgrade procedure (#4606)
OpenNMS/opennms: docs/modules/deployment/pages/upgrade/basic.adoc

[[upgrade-basic]]

> = Basic Upgrade

Reviewer: Make the page title a little more different from the parent upgrade section
```suggestion
= Basic Upgrade Steps
```

This procedure describes how to do a basic {page-component-title} upgrade, including upgrading the PostgreSQL database to a new version.
You may need to complete additional steps to upgrade in a more complex setup (running more than one OpenNMS instance, database migration requirements, age of current version, and so on).

IMPORTANT: Make sure you complete the tasks in the xref:deployment:upgrade/introduction.adoc#byb_upgrade[before you begin] section before upgrade.

== PostgreSQL upgrade and configuration
This example illustrates an upgrade from PostgreSQL 9.4 to 12.

> The process should be similar for different versions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The process should be similar for different versions.
See the link:https://www.postgresql.org/docs/[PostgreSQL documentation] for more details.
```

. Become root:
`sudo su -`
+
Expected outcome: `whoami` returns `root`.

. Install the latest version of the PostgreSQL repository package:

> `yum -y install <repository package location>`

Reviewer 2: Maybe this should be linked to https://www.postgresql.org/download/linux/redhat/ instead, to be more general?  Not sure how that should be written, though.

+
Expected outcome: `yum repolist pdg*` reports available repos for postgresql versions 9.6 through 14.

. Install new PostgreSQL version: `yum -y install postgresql-12 postgresql-12-server`
+
Upstream versions are designed to coexist with multiple installed versions.
+

> Expected outcome: `rpm -qa | grep postgresql` shows both 9.4 and 12.x package versions installed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Expected result: `rpm -qa | grep postgresql` shows both 9.4 and 12.x package versions installed.
```

. Initialize the PostgreSQL database: `/usr/bin/postgresql-12-setup initdb`
+
Expected result: command completes with no errors.

. Stop OpenNMS: `systemctl stop opennms.service`
+
Expected result: `systemctl status opennms.service` reports opennms is stopped.
+
NOTE: Your OpenNMS downtime starts at this point.

. Stop earlier version of PostgreSQL: `systemctl stop postgresql`
+
Expected result: `systemctl status postgresql.service` reports postgresql is stopped.

. Disable earlier version PostgreSQL: `systemctl disable postgresql`
. Stop PostgreSQL 12: `systemctl postgresql-12 stop`
+
Expected result: `systemctl status postgresql-12.service` reports postgresql-12 is stopped.

. Become the `postgres` user: `sudo su – postgres`
+
Expected result: `whoami` returns `postgres`

> . Run the PostgreSQL upgrade in "check" mode: `/var/lib/pgsql/data -D /var/lib/pgsql/12/data -r -v -c`

Reviewer 2: The database migration steps were copied nearly verbatim from https://opennms.discourse.group/t/upgrading-postgresql/772#upgrading-on-rhel-or-centos-using-pg_upgrade-6 

There may be other useful information in that post for reference.

+
Expected result: output ends with “Clusters are compatible”.
+
Verify these paths align with reality.

. Run the PostgreSQL upgrade without "check": `/usr/pgsql-12/bin/pg_upgrade -b /usr/bin -B /usr/pgsql-12/bin -d /var/lib/pgsql/data -D /var/lib/pgsql/12/data -r -v`
+
Expected outcome: output ends with “Upgrade Complete”.
+
NOTE: Verify these paths align with reality.
PostgreSQL's `pg_upgrade` utility copies the existing database into the new database and does not alter the existing database's data files.
This leaves the PostgreSQL 9.4 database in its original state and location which can be used for rollback.

. Replace `/var/lib/pgsql/12/data/postgresql.conf` with the updated copy.
. Copy `pg_hba.conf` from the postgresql 9.4 data directory to the postgresql-12 data directory: `cp /var/lib/pgsql/data/pg_hba.conf /var/lib/pgsql/12/data/pg_hba.conf`
+
NOTE: Verify these paths align with reality.
. Exit PostgreSQL shell: `exit`
+
Expected outcome: `whoami` returns `root`

== Update and verify the {page-component-title} repository

Your {page-component-title} repository is defined in a file in `/etc/yum.repos.d/`.

> It may be named {page-component-title}.repo  but is not guaranteed to be.

Reviewer 2: For Meridian, it is commonly "meridian.repo" but the `opennms-repo-stable` package creates the Horizon repo as `opennms-repo-stable-rhelX.repo` where X is the OS major version (6, 7, 8, etc).  The original text targeted a Meridian customer.

. Use the text editor of your choice to edit your {page-component-title} repository config to change the `baseurl` of the repository from the old release family to the new release family.
. Verify that the attribute `enabled=1` is defined, or enabled, or absent entirely
. Purge any cached yum data: `yum clean all`
+
Expected outcome: `yum repolist` does not show an error pertaining to the {page-component-title} repo; `yum info {page-component-title}-core` shows an available current package version.

. Install the PostgreSQL 12 version of iplike: `yum -y install iplike-pgsql12`
+
Expected outcome: `rpm -q iplike-pgsql12` reports an _iplike-pgsql12_ package is installed.

. Start postgresql-12: `systemctl start postgresql-12.service`
+
Expected outcome: `systemctl status postgresql-12.service` reports postgresql-12 has started.

> . Make a backup copy of your OpenNMS config: `mv /opt/opennms/etc /opt/opennms/etc.backup`

Reviewer 2: `rsync -Ppav /opt/opennms/etc /tmp/etc.orig`
`rsync -Ppav /opt/opennms/jetty-webapps/opennms/WEB-INF /tmp/opennms-web-inf` 

This leaves the original `etc` in place and makes an identical copy in `/tmp`.  If they don't have a pre-upgraded config from Support, they get to handle reconciliation themselves so they'll need the config in place.

. Upgrade the {page-component-title} packages to the new version: `yum -y upgrade {page-component-title}-core {page-component-title}-webapp-jetty`
+
Expected result: A lot of rpmnew files; `rpm -q {page-component-title}-core` reports the new version is installed.

> 
> . Move the package-updated etc directory out of the way: `mv $OPENNMS_HOME/etc $OPENNMS_HOME/etc.as.shipped.2021`
> 
> . ##What do users without support tarball do?## Unpack the OpenNMS Support-provided config tarball in `/opt/opennms`: `cd /opt/opennms; tar zxvf apple_etc.tar.gz`
> +
> Expected result: a new /etc directory is created.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> . Move the package-updated etc directory out of the way: `mv $OPENNMS_HOME/etc $OPENNMS_HOME/etc.as.shipped.2021`
> 
> . ##What do users without support tarball do?## Unpack the OpenNMS Support-provided config tarball in `/opt/opennms`: `cd /opt/opennms; tar zxvf apple_etc.tar.gz`
> +
> Expected result: a new /etc directory is created.
> 

Reviewer: This only applies to support customers
```suggestion
```

. Install Java 11: `yum -y install java-11-openjdk java-11-openjdk-devel`
+
Expected result: `rpm -q java-11-openjdk` returns a result.

. Execute runjava:
`$OPENNMS_HOME/bin/runjava -S /usr/lib/jvm/java-11/bin/java`
+
Expected outcome: `$OPENNMS_HOME/etc/java.conf` contains a path to the Java 11 JDK.

. Run the opennms installer: `$OPENNMS_HOME/bin/install -dis`

> +
> NOTE: This step took approximately two hours in a lab environment processing 1.9 million database events.
> It may be faster on your own hardware, but may still take significant time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

This only comes into play upgrading from something 20-or-older to 21-or-newer (iirc), because there is a migration of event data into two separate database tables, s it has to cycle through every event.  Most upgrades will not encounter this.

+
Expected result: A long delay, followed by output containing: `Upgrade completed successfully!`

. Clear the Karaf cache: `yes | $OPENNMS_HOME/bin/fix-karaf-setup.sh`
+
Expected outcome: The directory `$OPENNMS_HOME/data/` is empty.

. Start OpenNMS {page-component-title}: `systemctl start opennms.service`
+
Expected result: OpenNMS {page-component-title} starts with no errors and the Web UI is accessible as normal.
+
NOTE: `tail -F /var/log/opennms/manager.log` can illustrate at what point in the startup process {page-component-title} is currently.

. Upgrade is complete and operation is resumed.

> ##when do they copy over their changed config files?##

Reviewer 2: If it's upgraded in place, they don't.  Any shipped config that conflicts with existing user-modified config gets renamed to <filename>.rpmnew, and these files have to be manually inspected and the differences reconciled.  I like to use `diff -Bbw` and `diff -y` if I'm doing it by hand.

[[upgrade-basic]]
= Basic Upgrade Steps

This procedure describes how to do a basic {page-component-title} upgrade.

> You may need to complete additional steps to upgrade in a more complex setup (running more than one OpenNMS instance, database migration requirements, age of current version, and so on).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You may need to complete additional steps to upgrade in a more complex setup (running more than one OpenNMS instance, database migration requirements, and/or age of current version).
```

> IMPORTANT: Make sure you complete the tasks in the xref:deployment:upgrade/introduction.adoc#byb_upgrade[before you begin] section before upgrade.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
IMPORTANT: Make sure you complete the tasks in the xref:deployment:upgrade/introduction.adoc#byb_upgrade[before you begin] section before starting.
```

> In addition, if xref:releasenotes:whatsnew.adoc[system requirements] in the new version require you to <<posgresql-upgrade, upgrade your PostgreSQL database>>, we recommend you do this before the {page-component-title} upgrade.

Reviewer: Not a recommendation - a requirement
```suggestion
In addition, if xref:releasenotes:whatsnew.adoc[system requirements] in the new version require you to <<posgresql-upgrade, upgrade your PostgreSQL database>>, you must do this before the {page-component-title} upgrade.
```
